A Republican strategy to counter the re-election of Obama
Republican leaders justified their policy by the need to combat electoral fraud.
However, the Brennan Centre considers this a myth, stating that electoral fraud is rarer in the United States than the number of people killed by lightning.
Indeed, Republican lawyers identified only 300 cases of electoral fraud in the United States in a decade.
One thing is certain: these new provisions will have a negative impact on voter turn-out.
In this sense, the measures will partially undermine the American democratic system.
Unlike in Canada, the American States are responsible for the organisation of federal elections in the United States.
It is in this spirit that a majority of American governments have passed new laws since 2009 making the registration or voting process more difficult.
This phenomenon gained momentum following the November 2010 elections, which saw 675 new Republican representatives added in 26 States.
As a result, 180 bills restricting the exercise of the right to vote in 41 States were introduced in 2011 alone.
The new election laws require voters to show a photo ID card and proof of US citizenship.
Furthermore, these laws also reduce early voting periods, invalidate the right to register as a voter on election day and withdraw the right to vote of citizens with a criminal record.
Before the 2006 elections, no US State required voters to show a photo ID card.
Indiana was the first State to impose such a requirement.
In 2008, the Supreme Court of the United States upheld the constitutionality of the Indiana law.
The Republican authorities were quick to extend this practice to other States.
Over the past two years, they sponsored bills in 34 States to force voters to show a photo ID card.
It is important to note that, unlike Quebec, American citizens do not have a universal ID card such as the health insurance card.
In fact, 11% of American citizens, i.e. 21 million people of voting age, do not possess a photo ID card issued by a government agency of their State.
In addition, five million new voters in 2012 do not have such identification.
And it often costs over a hundred dollars to obtain the required identity card.
The new restrictions disproportionately affect young people, minorities and people with low incomes.
In fact, 25% of African Americans, 15% of those earning less than $35,000; 18% of citizens over 65 and 20% of voters 18 to 29 years old do not have the required photo ID card.
And that's not all.
Students, voters considered to be voting more for Democratic candidates, are not allowed in several States to use the photo ID card issued by their institution.
On the other hand, these same States allow fishing or hunting club members, who vote more Republican, to use the cards issued by these clubs when they vote.
Prior to 2004, no State required proof of citizenship to vote.
Arizona was the first to introduce such a requirement.
Since 2011, a dozen States have adopted laws requiring voters to prove they are American citizens.
These measures are clearly intended to limit the Hispanic vote.
However, it appears that two out of three Hispanic voters favour the Democratic party.
What is more, in 2011 Republican legislators sponsored laws abolishing the registration of voters on election day in eight States.
In addition, they limited the right of individuals and groups to provide assistance to voters wishing to register.
These restrictions are not without consequence.
For example, during the 2004 general election, voter registration campaigns contributed to registering around 10 million citizens.
However, the measures adopted since 2009 have led to a 17% drop in the registration rate of new voters in 2010 compared to 2006.
In addition, Republican legislators have enacted laws in five other States aimed at reducing the early voting period.
For example, during the 2008 general election in Florida, 33% of early voters were African-Americans, who accounted however for only 13% of voters in the State.
The same applied to Hispanics.
These represented only 11% of voters, but 24% of citizens who voted early.
On the other hand, 76% of voters were white but these represented only 46% of early voters.
Of course, Democratic legislators and their supporters vigorously opposed the adoption of laws restricting voter registration.
Several bills were blocked by vetoes of Democratic governors.
The United States Attorney General intervened to suspend the most controversial laws.
They were able to partially limit the damage.
For example, only 16 out of 34 States have adopted laws requiring the presentation of a photo ID card.
However, the new rules put in place will undoubtedly make it more difficult to exercise the right to vote in 2012.
Democratic critics denounce the partisan character of the laws that have been passed and they see a clear objective of influencing the 2012 results in key States.
A 2011 Brennan Centre report shows that the States that have adopted these laws represent 171 of the 270 votes needed in the electoral college to win the Presidency.
It is too early to say with certainty that these legislative changes in the electoral system will have significant impacts on the outcome of the 2012 presidential elections.
But one thing is certain: these new provisions will have a negative impact on the turn-out.
In this sense, the measures will partially undermine the American democratic system.
Prostate cancer screening: take the test or not?
Indeed, the PSA test sometimes shows erroneous results with false negative or even false positive results, which involve unnecessary medical interventions.
Enough to make already reluctant men hesitate to take screening tests.
Take the test or not?
We asked two specialists for their opinion.
In studies conducted in the United States, there was a lot of contamination between control groups, so it is difficult to interpret the data and make firm recommendations.
Another study, this time a European one, concluded that there was a difference in mortality between patients who were screened and those who were not.
This study also showed, with a follow-up after 12 years, that it is between 30 and 40% more likely for metastases to occur in the absence of screening.
I therefore recommend the test from age 50, or 40 if you have a direct relative who previously had prostate cancer.
African-American men are also more at risk.
The key is to make the right decision once cancer has been detected.
There are aggressive cancers and others that are indolent.
The patient really needs to be made to understand the degree of risk of his cancer, by offering him the options available, not necessarily treating prostate cancers that are not long-term life threatening, and opting instead, in such cases, for active monitoring of the disease.
Today, many men in whom cancer has been detected will not be treated because their cancer is not aggressive and is not life threatening.
Active monitoring will be suggested, and if the disease progresses, they will be offered treatment.
More and more, specific criteria are being determined in order to decide who should or should not be treated.
Therefore I recommend taking the test.
But the important thing is to have a discussion with your doctor to determine whether or not to take it.
In collaboration with the Société internationale d'urologie [SIU], Movember has created a tool that makes it possible to evaluate the pros and cons of the PSA test.
You can download the document (in English for the time being, a [French] translation will be available shortly) at this address: http://ca.movember.com/fr/mens-health/prostate-cancer-screening
Preventing the disease
Unfortunately, there is no miracle recipe for preventing cancer.
Despite the progress in research, the adoption of healthy living habits remains the best way to reduce the risk of suffering from it.
It is estimated that if everyone ate well and exercised enough, 30% of cancers could be prevented.
"If no more people smoked, this rate would increase to at least 50%," says André Beaulieu, spokesman for the Canadian Cancer Society.
On the other hand, it is estimated that roughly 10% of cancers are hereditary.
Some are also completely unexplained.
For the Canadian Cancer Society, the fight against tobacco remains a priority, despite the decrease in the number of smokers.
Cigarettes are linked to 85% of lung cancer cases.
It is also a risk factor for a number of others.
This massively damages people's health.
"Even today, there are 1.5 million smokers in Quebec" deplores spokesperson André Beaulieu.
Encouraging data: 10 years after giving up smoking, the risk of dying from cancer drops by half.
Weight
Overweight and obesity are also conducive to the onset of the disease, according to the SCC.
They can increase the risks of cancer of the breast, colon and rectum, oesophagus, pancreas and uterus.
"Research shows that the regular practice of physical activity throughout your life protects against colon cancer" it is also said.
Diet
The organisation also recommends limiting your consumption of red meat.
In large amounts, it increases the risks of developing colo-rectal cancer.
Likewise, so do cured meat products, and these should be avoided.
The conservation of meat by smoking, drying or curing can cause the formation of carcinogens.
"They can damage cells in the body and lead to the development of cancer" it is explained.
Vitamins
In recent years, a number of scientists have studied the links between vitamin supplements and cancer.
For the time being however their research is inconclusive.
Studies on vitamin E are contradictory, according to the SCC.
While one study noted a decrease in the risk of prostate cancer, another noted an increase.
Also the effect of vitamin D on cancer is not clear.
In addition, Mr Beaulieu emphasises the importance of discussing your concerns and family history with your doctor.
"Taking a screening test doesn't give you cancer."
The Higgs boson revealed
The announcement of the probable discovery of the Higgs boson created quite a stir last summer, and with good reason.
Indeed, it is believed that this boson is part of the mechanism responsible for the mass of everything in the Universe, no less.
Also it is the last particle whose existence is predicted by the Standard Model - our best or "less worse" explanation of the nature and behaviour of matter - but which has not yet been observed empirically.
But for physicists, it is still not completely sure that it really is the Higgs.
We know without a shadow of a doubt that it is a new authentic particle, and greatly resembles the Higgs boson predicted by the Standard Model.
In addition, new data unveiled this week at a large physics Congress in Kyoto seem to confirm this, but there are still insufficient data to be perfectly sure.
But let's suppose that it really is the Higgs, since the chances of being mistaken seem slim, and see what it is.
In our world, there is a fatally unavoidable law which states that two things cannot meet at the same place at the same time.
There's no way to break this rule - and don't try too hard, you'll go mad.
However, even though particle physics is a very strange world, it turns out that it also has a law of the same kind: the Pauli exclusion principle, which states that two particles cannot occupy the same space at the same time if they are in the same "quantum state" - this "state" consisting roughly of certain of their characteristics.
Based on this, physicists classify particles into two categories.
In one corner we have good citizens called fermions, who wisely obey the Pauli principle.
While lurking in the other are the bosons, a nasty band of anarchists who respect nothing - at all events, not this principle, which means that they can indeed be found in the same place at the same time.
These bosons are then divided into two groups, according to the Berkeley Labs Particle Adventure site (absolutely extraordinary, by the way): mesons, which we will not discuss here, and "force particles" by which the great forces of nature are propagated and to which the Higgs boson may be somehow related.
These bosons, it must be stressed here, are not all such exotic bugs as you might think.
In fact, if you can read this article, it is thanks to an extraordinarily banal boson: the photon, or the "light particle" which is the "messenger" of the electromagnetic force.
When, in fact, a particle having an electric charge accelerates or changes direction, this "disturbs" the electromagnetic field in this specific place, rather like a pebble thrown in a pond.
This "disturbance" produces an electromagnetic wave (of light, infrared, ultraviolet etc.), and this wave is nothing other than a photon - and thus one of the "force carrier" bosons.
More stable field
The same applies to the Higgs boson, with the difference that it is another field, the Higgs field, which must be "disturbed" for the boson to appear.
Now, this Higgs field is much, much more stable than the electromagnetic field; to excite it, it is necessary to achieve very, very high energy levels, rather like a frozen pond which would need a very large rock to wrinkle the surface.
Which is why a huge particle accelerator like the one at CERN - the Large Hadron Collider is a ring with a 27km circumference! - is needed to achieve such energy levels.
The analogy with the electromagnetic field is again useful for explaining the relationship between the Higgs and mass.
In fact not all particles, or all materials, interact with the electromagnetic field.
Some, such as magnets, do so, but others don't - a piece of paper, for example, will never stick to a fridge.
And likewise, not all particles interact with the Higgs field: those that do so have mass, while the others (such as the photon) do not.
Now, what is it that all this research "can bring"? asks Ms Plamondon.
For science, it serves to check the validity of the Standard Model (SM), and also allows physicians to examine any discrepancies between the observations and predictions of the SM.
A number of people, moreover, fervently hope that some will be found, because the slightest difference could open a door to a "new physics" and plug certain holes in the Model.
This, it must be said, still has huge shortcomings, offering no explanation for gravity (oops!) or dark matter, which forms approximately 80% of the matter in the Universe (re-oops!).
But to date no such discrepancies have been found at CERN.
Repercussions
The repercussions of this research on the daily life of the man in the street are more difficult to predict, but it would be wrong to assume that there won't be any.
Remember: in the very early 60s, the pioneers of the laser at Bell Laboratories did not suspect the revolution that would be triggered by their work.
They had an inkling of the scientific applications, but nothing as to the rest.
In fact, the late Willard Boyle - a physicist who worked at Bell Labs, where the laser was invented in 1960, and who himself developed the first continuous laser (the first were pulsed) in 1962 - told us that initially the laser was rather seen as a "lab gadget."
Just imagine...
And then, applications can also come from all the instrumentation that surrounds research.
For example, the same Willard Boyle developed a small light sensor in 1969, during his work in optics.
This sensor, although this was not at all the original intention, now serves as an "eye" to all digital cameras worldwide, and earned him the Nobel physics prize in 2009.
This does not of course mean that the activities of the LHC will necessarily transform our lives, but it does mean that, actually, you never know...
Palliative care - The best way to die... | Le Devoir
With its Dying with Dignity Commission, Quebec recently discussed the delicate issue of the end of life.
The debate is due to resume shortly as a bill is being prepared.
However, in this vital area, much remains to be done.
Le Devoir attempted to look more closely.
Just a few weeks ago Mr L. lived alone in his Montérégie apartment.
The festering prostate cancer had allowed him a two-year respite.
"They gave me five years to live, I've made it to seven," he says, with mixed emotions, lying in his bed at the Victor-Gadbois palliative care home in Beloeil, where he arrived the previous day.
"But it's still a shock, you can never be prepared for it" he adds.
The disease is doing its work: huge weakness which prevents him going to the toilet alone, and even eating alone.
Sitting in front of an appetising lunch, he consents to being helped to eat, resigned.
Courageous, he even manages to smile, talks to the strangers bustling around him, bringing him his medication, offering him a bath.
The courage of ordinary death.
"What I want most is to be cured of my diarrhoea, it's humiliating" he confided.
A few hours later, the team found a cure for this illness.
"During our lives, we learn that a man pisses standing up," says Pierre Brodeur, psychologist at the Victor-Gadbois home.
Regressing to the stage of a child, for some people, is an unacceptable humiliation.
"It depends on the person's ability" to accept the regression, he says.
Because, in the opinion of a number of people working in palliative care, great moments occur at the very heart of such regression.
Patients at the Victor-Gadbois palliative care home all suffer from cancer.
They have a maximum life expectancy of three months.
At this stage, the team of doctors and nurses surrounding them no longer provides so-called "curative" care.
For Mrs A., 89 years old, the worst fear is to die "conscious and suffocating."
But the disease has made me discover my children.
"I have fine children" she adds.
"I don't wish for anything more in life" she says, before accepting having a mask put on to help her breathe.
She looks forward nevertheless, in the next few days, to a last visit by her son coming from Italy.
At Victor-Gadbois, a group of volunteers provides bodily care and help with feeding.
This is palliative care, given when there is nothing else that can be done.
To make death more comfortable.
In Quebec, there are palliative care beds for 11,700 inhabitants.
This is very few when we know that we will all die one day.
Here, life continues under the best possible conditions, explains Dr Christiane Martel, one of the doctors at the home.
Whether at a physical comfort, emotional or spiritual level.
A person who is dying will accept being helped to drink brandy or Pepsi, whatever is their tipple.
Diabetics no longer need to control their blood sugar.
And death is part of everyday life.
Yesterday evening, a beer was served to Mr X, who died during the night.
This morning, it is his son who will finish the beer at the feet of the deceased.
"We help relatives as much as patients" says Nathalie Savard, Director of Care.
At the Victor-Gadbois home, one day follows another but no two are alike.
Along with a 93-year-old man who is savouring his last meeting with his family, sitting firmly wedged in his pillows while toasts are drunk in his honour, a 36-year-young man is dying tragically, surrounded by his parents, his wife and his two young children, after having tried everything to survive.
"For six months, there have always been three to five beds which are occupied by cancer patients less than 45 years old" says a concerned Dr Christiane Martel.
53% of patients admitted to the Victor-Gadbois home come from their homes, 47% from hospital.
Lack of access to palliative care
It is said that 77% of Canadians simply have no access to palliative care, which is care designed to ease the pain when a patient has reached the terminal stage of life, be it at home, in hospital or in a care home.
And a number of organisations, such as the Victor-Gadbois home and the Palliative Care Society in Greater Montreal, specialise more or less exclusively in care provided to cancer patients.
It is precisely this large gap in Quebec health care which has made a number of palliative care physicians fear the adoption of a law on euthanasia and assisted suicide.
Since October, a manifesto, signed by palliative care luminaries including Dr Balfour Mount and Dr Bernard Lapointe, has been circulating to demonstrate their opposition to such an initiative.
According to Dr Christiane Martel, the Quebec health system is not effective enough to ensure that everyone will be entitled to quality palliative care before it is accepted to proceed to euthanasia.
Recently, she says, I saw a patient spend 14 days in emergency, in great pain, without anything being done to ease her suffering.
I'm afraid that patients ask to die because they don't receive adequate care.
And at the same time, some oncologists work relentlessly on their patients until the last day, despite the worst prognoses.
Hélène Richard's survival hopes were already minimal when she ended her gruelling chemotherapy.
When I announced to my oncologist that I was stopping the treatment, she told me she regretted that I had given up fighting, she said.
However, she had told me I was finished!
No all-powerful care
Dr Martel believes that 90% of patients asking to die thank care-givers for not having acceded to their request after they have been relieved of their pain by a palliative care team.
But it must be said that palliative care is not absolutely all-powerful in the treatment of pain.
According to Elsie Monereau, Palliative Care Director with the Palliative Care Society in Greater Montreal, patients are resistant to treatment against pain in 8% of cases.
At the very end of life, physicians then often resort to palliative sedation, which is equivalent to putting the patient to sleep until the time of death, either sporadically or permanently.
We can no longer pretend not to understand this part of their suffering.
Increasingly, an unrelieved patient will have the option of having such palliative sedation.
Patients who are not relieved always say the same thing: "I want to die."
But this does not necessarily mean "I want you to euthanise me," it means "I want to be relieved."
This report was made possible thanks to a journalism award from the Canada health research institutes.
Widespread real estate scandals in Quebec
Day after day highway officials, building contractors, political party fund-raisers and Italian mafia specialists tell what they know of a formidable "system," combining the building industry, government officials, politicians, trade unionists and organised crime.
An "industry" which has cost Quebec taxpayers dearly, especially in the 1990s and 2000s.
"It is curious how the system is crumbling since we took drastic measures" says Jacques Duchesneau ironically, a Quebec politician and former Montreal Chief of Police.
It was through him that the scandal broke in 2011, in an in-depth investigation into corruption related to road construction contracts in Quebec, to which the liberal Prime Minister at the time, Jean Charest, had consented only reluctantly.
The "Duchesneau report" established a direct link between industry, under-the-table financing of parties and bribery of officials.
"Since the inquiry opened in 2010, he says, the Ministry of Transport alone reportedly saved a billion dollars on contracts," with certain people curbing their instincts to get a share!
The Charbonneau Commission "has already brought down two mayors" he adds, hoping that it will succeed in "revealing the schemes behind the individuals."
A permanent anti-corruption unit, created in 2011
The Permanent Anti-Corruption Unit, created in 2011, is also coupled with its army of government analysts, investigators, and auditors.
Plus the "Marteau squad" policemen who, since 2009, have apparently led the Montreal "sewer cartel" to soft pedal on the inflation of contracts...
In recent weeks, it has conducted a series of searches and brought charges of fraud and corruption against municipal politicians, such as Frank Zampino and Richard Marcotte, Mayor of a suburban town.
Next on the list is apparently Gilles Vaillancourt, who has just resigned from his post as Mayor of Laval, third largest city in Quebec.
He is suspected of pocketing repeated bribes in exchange for public contracts.
Others formally accused are Montreal highway engineers and Italian entrepreneurs, including Tony Accurso and Lino Zambito.
The latter caused a sensation by explaining the mechanics of the public contracts "system" to the commission.
He himself paid 3% of the value of the contracts obtained in Montreal to an intermediary linked to the mafia who in turn paid the money to Union Montréal, Mayor Gérald Tremblay's party.
Mr Zambito has handed money out freely in the 2000s, giving over 88,000 Canadian dollars (roughly 68,000 euros) to provincial parties, especially the Liberals then in power.
He also admitted having organised an illegal fundraiser for former Liberal Deputy-Prime Minister, Nathalie Normandeau.
Sewer contracts with inflated costs
In Montreal, the corruption "system" ran smoothly.
Gilles Surprenant, former public works engineer, described it in detail in front of the commission: in ten years, he received from construction companies gifts, invitations to trips, golf tournaments, restaurants, hockey matches and bribes totalling 736,000 dollars, in exchange for sewer contracts of which he inflated the costs.
Other highway officials admitted having their palms greased by inflating invoices by 30 to 40%, and by false add-ons.
Then an organiser of the Mayor's party, Martin Dumont, accused Mr Tremblay of having deliberately closed his eyes to a parallel budget feeding his coffers with dirty money.
Following these revelations, Mr Tremblay resigned in early November, plunging Montreal into a major crisis.
Chantal Rouleau was one of the first women in Montreal to raise the alarm.
Mayor of the borough of Rivière-des-Prairies, to the East of the island, she protested in 2010 against the sale of municipal land bought for 5 million dollars and resold for... 1.6 million to developers, at the height of the real estate boom.
70% dirty money in election campaigns
On the investigation which will eventually be implemented, she says she "is following a thread in order to find out how the system - infiltrated by ants - works, to put a stop to the gangrene and catch the culprits."
The process, she says, is "painful but positive."
The wound is being cleaned, but Montreal would need its own investigative unit with ongoing monitoring, to avoid the return of these questionable practices.
How to clean house.
Properly.
Jacques Duchesneau notes for his part that "officials stole hundreds of millions of dollars," but he is especially concerned about the role of "elected people aware of the scheme," when they were not up to their necks in the scam!
Estimating the share of dirty money in the financing of election campaigns in Quebec at 70%, he says dryly: "I was told that it was only a pale reflection of reality."
The Quebec government proposes to limit donations to parties to 100 dollars, but this will not change the situation, he says: "Until election expenses are strictly limited, there will be dirty money in politics."
He advocates a complete overhaul of the system for granting public contracts and party funding: "We can't go any lower; getting to the bottom of things, with courage, will help to rebuild the house on more solid foundations, with more controls and laws."
Although this story tarnishes the international image of Quebec and Montreal, Mr Duchesneau invites anyone laughing to look in their own backyard...
"PSG is not FC Barcelona!"